So, welcome back. Today, we change our perspective a little bit and we look at problem solving from the perspective of the goal essentially. Some people call this as uh goal-based reasoning or goal-directed reasoning. The general idea is to look at the goal and try to break it up into parts and see how to achieve that goal essentially. So, we saw a little bit when we were looking at goal-stack planning that we did try to say that if we have a set of goals like G1, G2, G3 you first address G1, then you address G2, and then you address G3 essentially. Now, we look at the slightly different approach for doing that. And that is called as goal trees or the process is can be called as problem decomposition. So, so far our view of problem solving using search has been state-centered. The state space is the arena of search. The solution is expressed as a sequence of states. In planning, the plan is a sequence of sets of actions. So, initially we started off by saying plan a plan is a sequence of actions. But then later, we kind of graduated to the concepts that at any given point, more than one action could be done in parallel. So, now we are saying it's a sequence of sets of actions. Now, we want to look at problem decomposition which takes a goal-directed view of plan problem solving. The emphasis on breaking up a problem into smaller problems. Like in backward state space planning, goal goes to subgoals essentially. We will have a notion of primitive problems uh which we don't have to refine any further and we would label such primitive problems by the label solved. If they are not primitive, that means they need to be refined and we would label them with a label live. Uh and they have to be refined further. And we have already seen a flavor of this when we look at the algorithm SSS* for game playing. So, there is going to be some similarity between the SSS* algorithm and the algorithm that we are going to look at today, which is called AO*. So, let's look at the motivation for looking at this uh uh backward reasoning point of view. Though there have been people who notably, for example, Robert Kowalski uh who was a um logician at Imperial College, London in the late 70s last in the last century in the 70s and the 80s and is credited with inventing this idea of logic programming. He propounded the opinion that human beings always are goal-directed, that we always focus on what are the goals we have and how do we achieve that. So, this is kind of along those lines. So, consider the problem of planning an evening out with your friends. So, let's say it's your birthday and your friends have decided to take you out for dinner or you have decided to take your friend out for dinner and you have decided that you that evening out would be made up of three things some activity that you would do, you know, whatever your favorite activities are going to a mall or going to the beach or uh whatever else followed by a movie and followed by dinner. But it has to be done with consensus of the people involved. So, let us say the agent proposing the plan works as follows. In the start, the agent says let's pick some activity then having chosen an activity, then pick a movie. Then having picked the movie, pick a restaurant for dinner. And then that way the agent has constructed a plan and present the plan to its friends. If it is not accepted, then backtrack and try to and some other plan essentially. So, essentially doing depth-first search in some fashion. There may be some preferences in the order in which you try the various activities. For example, if there are many movies you may say this is this is a preferred film, this is likely to be the preferred film and this is the next one and so on. But that is besides the point. So, we will assume that that is taken care of by the move gen function. It will generate movies in some preferred order or restaurants in some preferred order. But essentially the agent would be doing depth-first search essentially. And then the search may be conducted as follows. And remember that we are looking at this example to get some motivation of a different representation which is goal-directed. So, if it agent were doing depth-first search, it would start and saying, "Okay, I've picked the uh activity. Let's say the activity is visit mall and uh I've picked the movie. Let's say the movie is Matrix and I've picked picked the restaurant which is the Pizza Hut essentially. And then the agent says, "Okay, here I have a plan." and presents the plan to its friends. And the friends, let us say, don't accept that plan. So, the agent backtracks and says, "Okay, instead of Pizza Hut, we'll go to Saravana Bhavan." And then that is also rejected and again the agent backtracks and says that instead of the Matrix, we'll go to AI the film. And then followed along with AI the film, he presents both the options of Pizza Hut and Saravana and everything is rejected. And the agent keeps trying and eventually goes and changes the first option to beach essentially. And then once the beach is proposed and the film Matrix is proposed and restaurant Saravana Bhavan is proposed everybody accepts that solution and so the solution is visit the beach watch the Matrix, watch the film the Matrix and eat at Saravana Bhavan. But if you look at what the agent has been doing, I agent has been doing a lot of unnecessary work in this search. All this backtracking and trying out different things which you see in the left side of the tree. And you could identify now that maybe the culprit choice was that the agent proposed going to a mall whereas uh none of the things that followed after a mall were acceptable to uh um the agent's friends essentially. The only difference between the solution that was accepted was in the choice of the evening activity. When mall was replaced by the beach, the other two choices did not change. The film the Matrix was accepted and uh the restaurant Saravana Bhavan was accepted. So, that was also proposed here as you can see in these gray distincts. But that plan was not accepted because of the mall. And becau- if you can identify that mall is the culprit then, you know, all this extra search that you are doing here is really pointless essentially. But depth-first search, of course, cannot see that. And if you were to look at constraint satisfaction then constraint satisfaction has uh notion of uh uh jumping back many steps. So, in instead of going back from Pizza Hut and saying, "Okay, let me try another option Saravana Bhavan." In constraint processing, sometimes you can identify a culprit like this and jump back to that culprit. So, that's called con- conflict-directed back jumping. Um So, this is all the wasted search that the agent is doing. Chronological backtracking, by this we mean you undo the last choice that you made which is what depth-first search does. Results in wasted effort below the visit mall node. And as I just said, dependency-directed backtracking in constraint processing could have jumped back to the culprit variable if it could identify that that is the culprit variable. But anyway, we we may not have time to look at constraint processing in detail. But what we will look at is an alternative representation of this particular problem and uh see how to address that this thing. So, you can see that the key choices were independent of each other. You had to choose an evening activity which was um in which beach was an acceptable choice. You could go to a movie and let us say if the Matrix or Bhuvan Shome were acceptable choices. And for dinner, let's say only Saravana Saravana Bhavan was the acceptable choice. So, these key choices instead of doing the state space search that I'm planning the activity that first the evening activity, then the movie, and then the restaurant we can break it up into parts essentially. So, we can represent the search space now as what is called as an AND OR tree essentially. So, AND OR tree is a tree except that it has two kinds of arcs. So, at the top level, there is an AND arc. Sometimes we call it a hyper edge or hyper arc. But the point is that if you want to plan plan an outing, you have to do three things. You have to do uh when you have when you have to plan an evening out, you have to do two things. What is the evening activity? You have to choose a movie and you have to choose a dinner. These can be done somewhat In fact, in this example, these can be done independently and can be also solved independently. You know, you can first discuss as to what should be um the evening activity and having decided that, for example, let us visit the beach, then decide what is the movie that we want to go in. Uh and having decided that, you could go for the dinner. Instead of saying that, let me choose a plan of three things, uh let's say visit mall, uh watch uh AI the film, and then go to Pizza Hut, and then present it to the other people, you're saying that we'll break up the problem into parts, and breaking up the problems or problem decompositions happens naturally with AND-OR trees. So, there are two kinds of edges uh uh on two kinds of nodes or edges, we can use the term interchangeably. That there is an AND node which which has below it three edges which can be called as an AND arc, or you have an OR arc. The trees that we have been looking at so far, they can be called as OR edges because you have to choose, is it the left branch or is it the life right branch? And so, either the left branch or the right branch. Whereas in AND, you have to do all. You have to do the left branch, the middle branch, and the right branch as well. The solution in this tree is a subtree, which is shown in this thick arrows that for each of the three AND choices, you have to find a solution. So, we have the beach, the matrix, and Saravana Bhavan. As opposed to OR trees, where the solution was typically a path from the start state to the goal state. That's what we started with doing. That can you find a path which will um plan your evening out. But with an AND-OR tree, which are also called goal trees, the solution is a subtree, and the leaves of the tree are solved in the sense that no further decision making has to be done. So, another option, as I said, could have been Bhuvan Shome. Maybe that would have been a solution as well. So, this will take you back to this idea of means-ends analysis we had seen when we were looking at planning, and we had said that uh that's why uh uh you break up the problem into smaller parts, and reduce the largest difference between the goal state and the given state first, and having reduced that difference in a recursive fashion, move over to saying that, once we have generated the state S prime, then achieve the goal from the state S prime. So, this also had an AND node, and we had mentioned at that point that the means-ends analysis strategy generates an AND-OR tree by replicating the structure below. So, here are some examples where AND-OR trees happen naturally uh in some of the work we do. Uh and this particular problem relates to symbolic integration, and I'm sure some of the younger uh people in the audience will be fresh with these ideas, and some of the older people um like me uh may not be so fresh with those ideas. In any case, if you remember symbolic integration, then you know that one of the things that you keep doing is substituting variables with something else essentially. So, the node on the top, which is x raised to 4 divided by 1 - x squared, the whole thing raised to 5 by 2, has to be integrated with respect to x. And if you replace x with sin y, that problem gets transformed into a different problem, where it is sin raised to 4 divided by cos raised to 4 uh with a variable y essentially, dy. So, we have transformed the problem, and this is typical of problem decomposition that you take a problem and transform the problem into something similar, or in the process sometimes break it up essentially. Now, this this transformed problem, sin raised to 4 by cos raised to 4, can itself be solved in different ways. You can convert it into tan raised to 4, which is the most natural thing to do, or you can convert it into a more complex uh uh function, or you can do cot raised to -4, which is uh uh the inverse of tan raised to 4 essentially. Uh this itself you could break down to uh integrating 1 over x raised to 4 over 1 + x squared. Whereas if you're doing with tan raised to 4, you would break it down into z raised to 4 over 1 + z raised to 4. There is always a danger in this which we have not highlighted, that you can go in cycles. So, for example, I can convert it from tan to cot and cot to tan and so on. So, if an automated problem solver is working with it, they may have to be careful of avoiding cycles, and we will do that when we write the algorithm. So, continuing with this symbolic integration, uh one of the things that we can do with this one is integration by parts, and we break it up into uh saying that, integrate -1 + z squared plus 1 over 1 + z squared dz. And then each of these three parts is handled separately because that those are the rules of integration. If you're integrating two functions, f + g, you can do them separately. If you're doing the product, of course, then we have a product rule which you might have wanted to use essentially. So, -1 can you we know that the integral of a constant is just - dz. And if you put w is equal to -z, then you can get a primitive. So, we assume that in our symbolic integration uh workplace, we have some primitives which we don't have to resolve further, whose integral we already know essentially. So, these are primitive problems, or what we have called as solved nodes. So, this z squared, of course, is also going to be recognized as a primitive. And this last piece, which was dz over 1 + z squared, if you substitute z is equal to tan w, this also reduces to dw. So, now you have reduced this. So, you have you solved these three, you have these three primitives, you back substitute them, and eventually you will get a solution which looks like this. Uh uh which on the surface looks to be quite complex. Let's look at another example which was quite popular which uses uh AND-OR trees, or AND-OR graphs also, as they are called. Uh and this was a program called DENDRAL, which was written uh between 1965 and 1980. And it is often touted as one of the earliest successes of AI. Uh and this was developed in uh Stanford University. So, DENDRAL is a short form for dendritic algorithm. So, den comes from here, and all comes from here. D N D R comes from here, and all comes from there. It was the first AI program to emphasize the power of specialized knowledge over general-purpose search essentially. So, we are focusing on search, but we can now see that search can be combined with knowledge. We have already have this notion that, you know, a heuristic function, which is essentially some domain-specific knowledge, can be used to guide search essentially. So, this is another example which emphasizes on specialized knowledge. The goal of the program was to assist a chemist in the task of determining the structure of a chemical compound. So, if you know the molecular formula of a compound, you want to discover the structural formula of the compound, and it turns out that a compound with a given molecular formula may have many different structural formulas. So, the number of candidate structures for the given compound can be very large. DENDRAL led to a program called CONGEN, which was called constraint generator, that allows the chemist to constrain the generation of possible candidates, narrow down search based on what is likely and what is not likely. So, let's look at this very small example. There is this molecular formula given to us, C6, six carbon atoms, 13 hydrogen atoms, one nitrogen atom, and two oxygen atoms. So, C6H13NO2. The candidate structures generated by DENDRAL for this were as follows. So, you can see that all these figures have six carbon atoms, two oxygen atoms, and one nitrogen atom. We have not shown the hydrogen atoms for uh lack of space, but you can imagine that knowing the valencies of all these atoms, carbon has a valency four, for example, so you would know that there is one hydrogen atom here, there's one hydrogen atom here. That can be filled in easily, and so on essentially. So, likewise for other things essentially. So, here, for example, uh you can see that two of its valencies have been used up, so it can accommodate two hydrogen atoms. So, wherever there is a valency, hydrogen atoms, but the important point is that these are different structural formulas which uh CONGEN generated, and then the chemical chemist could look at it essentially. Now, Dendral is touted as an expert system, and as you can see from this diagram, it operates in the space of which is an AND-OR graph. So, this is the input given to you, C5H12 for example, and it has many choices, which are shown by these dashed edges. It can reduce it to this, it can reduce it to this, or transform it to this and so on, just like we transform one symbolic integral problem into another problem. This can also be done. So, you can see that on the top left for example, much of the structure has been decided, but a little bit more still has to be developed further essentially. Likewise, in many of the other diagrams essentially. For the structure in the bottom, which had two things to be unearthed, you can see that what we have said here in this AND node is that you solve for C2H5, which has one valency attached, another C2H5, which will be the same, and both will have the same solution, that two carbon atoms and five hydrogen atoms can be arranged in this fashion. And of course, the third part is that you have this thing. So, one of the C2H5 will come here, the other will come here, and that will give us the structure of the formula essentially. Anyway, so this is a space which Dendral searched in, and uh from our point of view, it's an example where AND-OR trees can be useful. So, it explored an AND-OR graph, and uh it generated candidate structures like the example shown here, but what more importantly, how does it decide which structures are likely and which structures are not? It also generated what is called as a synthetic spectrogram as to if this was the structure of the material, what would the spectrogram look like, and it had enough knowledge in its system to be able to do that. Then, it this synthetic spectrogram was compared with the spectrogram of the material, and based on that, a decision was made whether this structure is likely or is the one, and so on and so forth. It performed better than most human chemists because the human chemists have to also search in the same space, and Dendral being a machine, uh could, you know, work relentlessly uh searching all these things. So, this was just to illustrate uh how AND-OR trees or AND-OR graphs, we call it a graph because if you look at this bottom most node here, uh it's a leaf for many other nodes. So, the structure is really a graph essentially. We could have drawn it as a tree if we had kept three copies of this bottom node, but then why waste space doing that? This was called an expert system. So, in the 1980s, it was the era of expert systems. Uh we will look at a little bit of at expert systems uh uh in the following week. Um but this is an example uh where the whole computer science community was involved in saying that to solve problems which are complex, you must extract knowledge from human users, put it into the system in some form, and use that to solve problems essentially. We will come back to the idea of expert systems later. Right now, let's focus on uh how what is a goal tree, and how it is it solved. So, the search space generated for solving an AND-OR graph can be seen as a goal tree. So, if you look at this uh tree, there is a goal G, and it can be solved in two ways. One way is on the left-hand side, and the other way is on the right-hand side. So, it can be defined in two ways. The left branch says that if you want to solve G, you solve the sub-goal A essentially. The right hyperedge, we'll call it an hyperedge because it's made up of an AND edge, which has two individual edges, reduces it to sub-goals B and C, but both of them have to be solved, and that is the semantics of an AND edge or AND this thing. The nodes in the search space can have a heuristic value because we are trying to do heuristic search, which would be an estimate of so of the cost of solving that particular node. So, we'll assume that somehow from the domain, we have a heuristic value, and the edge costs indicate the cost of transforming a problem. So, we will associate some edge costs with edges because we are doing this effort of transforming the problem into another problem, and that must be accounted for in the cost of arriving at the solution. And finally, if you have solved leaf nodes, it may have non-zero costs as well. Uh if you're doing mathematics like symbolic integration, then, you know, integrating DW for example doesn't incur any extra cost. But if you were to, let's say, build up uh AND-OR tree for constructing a building for example, and if let's say the primitive, just for argument's sake, let's say the primitive is to build uh uh the left wall, build the back wall, build the right wall, and build build the front wall. Uh if this was to be a primitive, uh it would have an associated cost, and therefore your design would have to have an associated cost. So, leaf nodes can have a non-zero cost as well essentially. We can also transform uh these AND-OR graphs into layered trees or layered graphs as follows. Uh can be converted into graph with pure AND levels and pure OR nodes at each level essentially. So, essentially, you're saying that there are two ways of solving G. First, you solve A. One way is to solve A, which is the left branch. The other way is to solve something we are calling BC, but to solve BC, you have to solve B, and you have to solve C essentially. So, this layered tree that we are talking about, I hope that is reminiscent of the game tree that we had seen, and I will encourage you to think of the similarities and differences between game trees and layered uh goal trees. Uh one thing is common that at one point, there is a choice that you do this or you do this, but at a next level, you have to address all choices essentially, which is also the case for game trees. So, Max had to at its turn account for one of the choices that it can make, that was captured by the strategy that we were representing, but at the min level, it had to account for all of min's choices, which is like an AND essentially. So, we'll we'll we'll take a break here and come back and uh look at how goal trees can be solved